---
type: post
title: Svelte - the framework for those who don't want a framework
authors:
  - gustavjorlov
---

The hype around web frontend frameworks seems like a never ending story. This article is not trying to address that problem. But sometimes there comes around something that challenge the norm of how things are done. [React](https://reactjs.org) was one of those frameworks that completely revolutionized the industry thanks to some controversial ways of structure code.

Svelte uses new controversial ways of going about things that have caught my interest. In this article I will present an overview of Svelte.

<!-- more -->

## Problems to solve

### Bundle size

A common problem with web applications today is that the bundle size is way too large to provide a fast user experience. Not only does the code need to be delivered over a network, it also needs to be parsed before anything can be painted to the screen. A common problem with almost all frameworks today. Solutions like code splitting and server side rendering exists but I rarely see that they are used. Code splitting can also not be done on the framework bundle, typically the largest portion of the bundle anyway.

### Performance

Declarative code style is very popular. In the case of React, given a set of input props it declares what markup should be produced. Not _how_, but _what_ markup. Under the hood React uses a "virtual dom" mechanism that compares every single piece of the old markup against a proposed new markup. If any difference is found, React will access the "browser dom" and perform the actual update.

### Things to learn

Developers like things that are easy to learn but have a flexible nature. A trend amongst frameworks since the jQuery days is that there are typically less framework specific details to learn. jQuery had a ton of API to learn, Angular 1.x had its share of boilerplate, React has reduced that even more. But this article is about to describe Svelte, which in my humble opinion has been the easiest framework to learn to date since there actually aren't that much to it.

## Solution attempts

The creator of Svelte, Rich Harris, recognized that frameworks aren't made for organizing code, they only organize our minds. Meaning that the translation from declarative code (the _what_) to imperative code (the _how_) might as well be done at build time rather than at run time. This moves the necessity of a framework being present from the client browser to the build step. If we don't need to ship a framework to the client, the bundle size can be significally smaller.

Svelte also doesn't use a "virtual dom" to keep track of updates, it uses shallow equality comparison along with a "reactive operator" to know what to update. It does so by producing the actual dom api calls needed to make the update. That also gets rid of a complete category of performance problems. Therefore Svelte is also very fast.

Svelte is currently at version 3, which fundamentally works the same way as version 2, but it focuses a lot on the developer experience. That's what caught my interest and has kept me going, since there actually aren't that much API details to remember.

## Developing in Svelte

Start to play around with Svelte using the following commands, which effectively clones an example project setup:

```shell
  npx degit sveltejs/template new_app
```

The project setup is put in the `new_app` directory. Enter that folder and start developing like so:

```shell
  cd new_app
  npm install
  npm run dev
```

Visit http://localhost:5000 and open your editor of choice to take a look around of the files that produced the web application. Find `src/App.svelte` and make a change. It should immediately be reflected in the browser.

The svelte compiler is configured in `rollup.config.js` and `src/main.js` is the starting point for the application.

### Components

Components in Svelte follows the "component tree" abstraction made popular by React. Creating custom elements that's inserted into your regular HTML markup. Create a new file `src/Timer.svelte`.

```html
<script>
  // javascript goes here
</script>

<style>
  // styling goes here
</style>

<button on:click="{handleClick}">+ 30 seconds</button>
```

Remove most of `src/App.svelte` and import the Timer component:

```html
<script>
  import Timer from "./Timer.svelte"
</script>

<Timer />
```

By now, if your editor hasn't shown you nice colors yet, it's time to set it to highlight `html` and you should be good to go.

The timer button should be disabled for 30 seconds after clicked, so let's add some logic to do that. It's a simple interval counting down and we use curly braces to use variables and functions in the markup.

```html
<script>
  let time = 0;

  setInterval(() => {
    // if time is 0 (or below?) stay 0, otherwise decrease by 1
    time = time <= 0 ? 0 : time - 1;
  }, 1000);

  // handler to refer to from the markup
  const handleClick = () => {
    time += 30;
  };
</script>

<style>
  button[disabled] {
    background: white;
    color: lightgrey;
  }
</style>

<button disabled={time !== 0} on:click={handleClick}>+ 30 seconds</button>
```

### Stores

## Developer Experience

## Conclusion

## Resources

[Svelte Tutorial](https://svelte.dev/tutorial/basics)
